.\" tinyclipboard - a cross-platform C library for accessing the clipboard.
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2016 Marvin Gülker <m-guelker@guelkerdev.de>
.\"
.\" All rights reserved. See the README and LICENSE files for the
.\" licensing conditions.
.TH tiny_clipversion "3" "January 2016" "Marvin Gülker" "tinyclipboard"
.SH NAME
tiny_clipversion \- tinyclipboard version information

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <tinyclipboard.h>
.sp
.B #define TINYCLIPBOARD_VERSION
.sp
.B const char* tiny_clipversion\fR(\fBvoid\fR);

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fBtiny_clipversion()\fR function gives information about the
version of the \fItinyclipboard\fR library in use, condensed into one
string.

.PP
The \fBTINYCLIPBOARD_VERSION\fR macro provides the same information,
but separated into components you can check against. It is defined as
the version number as an ordinary number of form \fBYYYYMMPPL\fR,
where \fBYYYY\fR denotes the year, \fBMM\fR denotes the month (with a
leading zero if it is a month < 10), \fBPP\fR denotes the patch
release number (again with a leading zero or even with two zeros for
the first release in a month) and \fBL\fR is literal (i.e. denotes a
\fBlong int\fR constant value). For example, it may have the value
\fB20160100L\fR, which means the release was made in January 2016, and
it was the first of any releases in January. If it had the value
\fB20160101L\fR, then it would be the second release in January 2016.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.PP
This function returns a pointer to statically allocated memory that
contains the version information as a \fBNUL\fR-terminated string that
does not end with a newline. It must not be freed.

.PP
The macro is defined as a literal constant of type \fBlong int\fR.

.SH ERRORS
.PP
None.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
None.

.SH NOTES
.PP
The \fItinyclipboard\fR library follows a simplistic versioning
scheme that is mostly based on the release date. The version number is
of form \fBYY.MM\fR, which refers to the shorted year and the number
of the month the release was made in. If multiple releases are made in
the same month, the version number becomes \fBYY.MM.PP\fR, where
\fBPP\fR is the number of the followup release (\fBPP\fR can never be
zero, as it then falls off). \fBPP\fR has no leading zeros, but
\fBMM\fR has. Note that it it rather unlikely that I do more than nine
releases in a month.

.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
None.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
The \fItinyclipboard\fR library was written by Marvin Gülker <m-guelker@guelkerdev.de>.
